A very favorite part
of our Gilead graduation program
is The Inside Story,
where we get to know a few of our students
a little bit more intimately.
So we’re looking forward to hearing that now
as it’s presented by Brother Mark Noumair.
Eighty years!
Those reaching this milestone in life are
described as having “special mightiness.”
But does that apply just to people?
The 153rd class
marks the 80th anniversary
of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
During that span, the school
has survived a world war,
country bans, legal threats, mob threats,
and even a global pandemic.
But we’ve done more than just survive.
Welcome to this edition of The Inside Story.
At 2 Kings 13:18, 19,
the prophet Elisha told King Jehoash
to ‘take the arrows and strike the ground.’
This was to indicate his zeal and enthusiasm
for Jehovah’s work.
Sadly, the king’s zeal was lacking.
How about those taking the lead
in Jehovah’s organization today?
Have they been striking the ground
with hearts full of zeal and persistence?
Yes, they have, and Gilead School
gives irrefutable evidence of this.
As World War II raged,
Jehovah’s spirit led our brothers
to see the need
for increased divine education
before the end of this system.
The organization’s president, Nathan Knorr,
directed the start of Gilead School
in South Lansing, New York.
Starting in 1943,
faithful men such as Albert Schroeder,
Russell Kurzen, Maxwell Friend,
Frederick Franz, and Eduardo Keller
instructed the first classes of students
eager to go where people
needed to hear the good news.
Since then, Gilead’s location has changed
and instructors have changed,
but one thing hasn’t changed:
Gilead graduates have used
their theocratic education
to strengthen their brothers and sisters
wherever they’ve been assigned.
As this world continues its downward spiral,
Gilead continues to thrive and adapt
as it meets the needs
of Jehovah’s growing organization.
And so with that,
let’s welcome our students and learn how
the Gilead legacy has impacted them.
Please welcome our first guests,
Brother and Sister Kunda from Zambia.
We are so happy to have you with us on
The Inside Story, Kena and Chila.
How long have you been serving in Zambia?
And tell us about your assignments
at the branch office.
We have been serving at the branch
for five years now, and we’re both assigned
to the Local Design/Construction Department,
LDC.
Beautiful, and here we see
a picture of these smiling faces.
There you both are.
And who are the three others in the picture?
Those three are three field representatives,
and this was during a Kingdom Hall build
that we visited.
We really enjoyed that assignment.
Well, obviously, you did.
Look at those smiling faces.
That’s building Kingdom Halls.
Kena, you’re working with LDC.
How many Kingdom halls are needed in Zambia?
So in the next five years,
we need a thousand new Kingdom Halls.
A thousand Kingdom Halls.
Now, that fast growth of Kingdom publishers,
that’s something that’s marvelous to see.
In fact, what is the ratio there in Zambia?
Currently, there are
a little over 190,000 publishers in Zambia,
so that would make it approximately
1 Witness to 99 people.
One to 99—that is just wonderful!
So, what do you contribute to that?
I can think of two factors:
First, anyone who visits Zambia
remembers it for its warmhearted people.
They are very humble and welcome
good conversations about the Bible.
Excellent.
Well, then, that is something
that is very attractive
—the truth is attractive to them—
humble, warmhearted people.
In fact, many people mention that to me
that have visited Zambia as well.
So good.
What else?
The second factor is that the government
is favorable toward Jehovah’s Witnesses,
allowing the preaching work to flourish.
That’s right.
In fact, the work of Jehovah’s Witnesses
has been highly regarded
as a stabilizing influence on society,
and this in turn moves
many honesthearted ones to learn the truth.
That’s the training Jehovah gives his people,
wouldn’t you say?
The training, the divine education
that God’s people have been given
—now that translates into how they teach
and how they interact with people.
Wouldn’t you say that?
Absolutely!
In fact, thanks to that divine education,
Jehovah’s people apply
that knowledge in their lives, others see it,
and all praise and glory goes to Jehovah.
Beautiful!
So warmhearted people,
a stabilizing influence
in the community, growth
—Kingdom work and Kingdom growth
is happening in Zambia.
There’s something else
that’s dear to all our hearts
that has had an impact on the Kingdom growth.
Well, what would that be, Chila?
It’s the Become Jehovah’s Friend  series
with Caleb and Sophia.
These videos have taught valuable principles
to young ones very effectively.
I like that
—valuable principles for young ones.
So as these young ones
are learning these Bible principles
(and that’s instilled
in their little hearts and minds),
when they grow up, what’s the result?
Yes, it’s just wonderful to see how
the organization is using
the Become Jehovah’s Friend  series
for the young ones,
because it’s laying a foundation for them
to become mature Christians
when they grow up.
So they have a pattern of making decisions
that reflect Jehovah’s thinking.
They grow up and become pioneers and elders
in the congregation.
Excellent, and were you speaking
about one in particular?
Yes, we have a good example of that
with Jamin.
He is one of many young ones in Zambia
who enjoys using
the Become Jehovah’s Friend  series.
Yeah, and here we see a picture.
Can you explain that picture?
So Jamin is closest to his dad on the left.
Both his parents are regular pioneers,
and they got his name from the video
Warning Examples for Our Day.
There’s Jamin again.
Yeah, he’s about six years old now.
And you can see
he looks very ready for the ministry.
He does.
Yeah, he enjoys using the videos
because he’s able to even recite them
from the heart.
And he goes as far as even imitating Sophia
and taking some publications
with him to school.
And he does so good to the extent
that even when he’s packing the publications,
he has a friend in mind
whom he wants to give it to.
But it’s that evangelizing spirit
at a young age that’s taking root in Zambia
because of the Become Jehovah’s Friend
series—excellent.
Missionary spirit, here we go—wonderful.
But when you think
about the legacy of Gilead School
and the missionary spirit there in Zambia
(this is the 80th anniversary of the school),
the impact
in Zambia became very obvious early on.
In fact, the first Gilead missionaries
to arrive in Zambia were (in 1948)
Brothers Harry Arnott and John Ferguson.
We see their pictures here.
They were in the eighth class of Gilead
along with Stanley Jones and Harold King.
In those early days,
those early classes of Gilead,
11 percent were of the anointed,
and that led
to a stabilizing influence as well
in the global field with Gilead graduates.
In fact, we went to the Gilead archives,
and we found some
of Brother Ferguson’s handwritten letters.
And there’s one (in that letter)
where he mentions that in 1948
when he arrived,
there were only 15,000 publishers in Zambia.
Back then,
the country was called Northern Rhodesia.
But it was his prayer that The Watchtower
would be translated
into the local language of Cibemba,
and he prayed for more missionaries to come.
What a beautiful spirit!
Was that prayer answered?
Jehovah certainly answered those prayers.
Today, we have all the study publications
translated not just into Cibemba
but into 12 other local languages.
Beautiful.
And now, to date, some 58 Gilead graduates
have been assigned to Zambia.
So more publications, more translation,
more Gilead graduates sent in.
What a legacy now that the Gilead School
has had in Zambia!
I can say that those missionaries helped us
in more ways than just the preaching work.
Well, why do you say that?
Around 1968, there was a ban on the work
that resulted in the deportation
of the initial group of missionaries,
and this was followed by a wave
of persecution and opposition.
That made it a challenge to organize
the work for the local brothers.
In fact, at one point,
it seemed like the work was stagnating.
But in 1986, something exciting happened.
What happened?
Missionaries were allowed back into Zambia.
I remember that too.
We were missionaries in East Africa,
and the lifting of the ban in Zambia
was big news.
In fact, it excited us
over in East Africa as well.
We prayed for the brothers in Zambia,
so we’re so happy that things
were able to move forward.
That showed that the work
continued to pick up after that in 1986.
What happened after 1986?
In fact, there was a great increase
in new publishers.
And so the missionaries helped the new ones
to progress to maturity,
stabilizing them.
In speaking to the local brothers
that served during that time,
they especially appreciated
how the missionaries
helped them organize the work
from the branch office.
And from there
they helped the field thrive
and experience incredible growth.
So you’re saying the local brothers
and the missionaries worked together
and that it would have brought
positive results?
Absolutely!
Good.
How did the local brothers respond when
the missionaries came in to work with them?
I would say that was the best part.
The local publishers
came to love the missionaries.
They were so kind and humble
right from the start.
It opened their eyes to the fact
that we’re all one and the same.
And to see the missionaries
try and say a greeting in the local language,
it was nice to see.
But to see them progress
from just a greeting
to holding a long conversation
and to even giving a public talk
in my local language—that was heartwarming.
That must have been wonderful
to hear and to see.
Yes.
And the missionaries also
didn’t rush their time
with the local publishers,
and this helped them to learn more
about the culture.
For example, accepting a meal invitation
after an assembly—
Mm-hmm.
They would be tired,
and they’d be hungry too.
But this was not a quick meal
at a restaurant.
It meant going home and cooking,
getting the food prepared, . . .
Yes.
. . . getting the chicken ready.
Exactly.
And then it meant you ate late,
and they had to go home late.
But the highlight of this
was the encouragement that they gave us.
Beautiful.
They encouraged us to pursue spiritual goals.
We could see the love that they had for us,
but most important, we could feel it.
Excellent.
Do you agree, Kena?
Yes, I do.
I experienced that at a young age.
What happened?
At one time, my family
had a missionary couple over for lunch,
Brother and Sister Finch.
We had a good meal, a wonderful time.
But what we remembered from that day
was something totally different.
A few days after they left,
the Finches sent us a small thank you card.
They expressed appreciation for the time
and shared a Scriptural thought too.
That they took the time to do this
touched all of us deeply.
In fact, my father used that card
as an object lesson in teaching us children
how to show gratitude
when others do kind things for us.
Isn’t that wonderful?
It’s these little acts of love,
these little stitches of love,
that make this close-knit bond
of a loving brotherhood there in Zambia.
Oh, there’s Brother and Sister Finch
there with you.
Yes.
You can see from the smile
that they have become fully Zambian now.
We are happy to serve with them at the branch
and continue learning
many valuable lessons from them.
Good, excellent.
So, what if we now show the audience
a short video clip
of Zambia and what’s happening there
and the work?
Would you like to do that?
Yes.
Absolutely.
OK, let’s watch.
Located in southern Africa,
Zambia is about a quarter
of a million square miles (647,000 sq km)
—a little larger than the state of Texas
in the United States.
Zambia is home to beautiful forests,
the mighty Zambezi River,
magnificent waterfalls,
and abundant wildlife.
Yes, and because of our mild climate,
we enjoy a rich variety of foods.
But the real beauty of Zambia
lies in its people.
You can find Jehovah’s people
almost everywhere you go.
And the ministry
continues to be ripe for harvesting.
If you called on a person in the morning
and a Witness comes in the afternoon,
in other countries
they’ll let you know that that’s happened.
But in Zambia,
they’ll just listen a second time.
When going from house to house,
sometimes a person will invite you,
not into their house,
but to sit under the mango tree.
They bring their tins,
their buckets, or whatever,
and you sit there,
and then you can speak with them.
And sometimes they
even will collect their Bible from inside
when they see you because they know
you’re there to discuss the Bible.
So they’re very lovable people.
The simple, friendly approach
that the brothers and sisters have to the ministry
and their strong belief
that everyone
is a potential friend of Jehovah
—that helps them to make
spiritual progress with people.
Can everyone in Zambia
be a Jehovah’s Witness?
Well, I think it’s a good goal to have.
Zealous proclaimers
come in all shapes and sizes.
Would you like to see Jamin in action?
I want to be like Jamin when I grow up.
I know.
Me too.
Jamin is one of many young ones
in Zambia right now
who are making Jehovah’s heart so happy.
So if you travel to Zambia,
what will you find?
You will see a great crowd of loyal
and hardworking Kingdom proclaimers.
And while we are all different colors
and ages and sizes,
we are one big happy family
thanks to our happy God, Jehovah.
Now, that was just a beautiful video clip.
Thank you so much.
But Kena,
the brother and sister at the end with
Brother and Sister Finch, they look like you.
That’s Mom and Dad, and that’s them
meeting the Finches after almost 25 years.
What a beautiful reunion that must have been!
And are they with us today?
Yes, in fact, they are
somewhere in the audience.
Excellent.
I bet they’re very proud of you both.
Thank you so much.
And thank you for sharing your comments
with us with The Inside Story.
Just watching this video helps us to see why
the love and the joy of the Zambian people
come through very, very loud and clear.
So with that, we say thank you.
Next, please welcome
Eric and Megan Lee from Micronesia.
We are so happy to have you,
Eric and Megan, on The Inside Story.
So tell us, before coming to Gilead,
you were serving in the Micronesia branch,
and that is located
on the beautiful island of Guam.
So how long have you been serving there,
and what’s your work like at Bethel?
Well, I’ve been serving there
for the last ten years.
The last eight of those years, Megan and I
have been serving
at the branch office together.
And I currently work
in the Service Department.
Good.
And what about you, Megan?
What’s your work assignment?
I work in the Translation Department,
and we support the work of six remote
translation offices throughout Micronesia.
Beautiful.
I bet that’s a lot of work.
Thank you for doing it.
Now, on our screen,
we have a very interesting picture.
Eric, what is happening here?
Tell us about it.
This is the two of us
when we visited the island of Pohnpei.
We were sent there
to help teach a Bethel Service School.
But this is when we first arrived
on the island at the airport.
We were greeted by the brothers and sisters,
and they gave us what you see
on the top of our heads.
What is that?
Locally, those are called mwarmwars.
They’re handwoven
by the brothers and sisters,
and they’re often given to guests
when they first arrive.
I mean, that’s a lot of work to make those,
and it shows the hospitality and love.
Very nice, thank you.
So now, Megan,
I understand you were born on Guam.
So, what was it like growing up
on the island of Guam?
Tell us about it.
Well, it is a small island,
so no matter where you are,
the branch office is never far away.
It was definitely a special privilege
to be able to grow up so close to Bethel.
How far would the branch have been
from where you were raised?
Maybe a little less than 15 minutes.
So was Bethel in your backyard?
It was very close.
Excellent.
So how did that impact you?
It was very special to be so close
to a center of spiritual activity
where so many brothers and sisters
are working hard full-time for Jehovah.
Mm-hmm.
Eventually,
my sister started commuting to Bethel,
and she invited me to join her,
so we were able to do that together.
Excellent, so you commuted to Bethel
with your sister.
And who’s older, you or her?
She is.
OK, very nice.
But what a privilege to be together
commuting there
at the Bethel in Guam!
Now, what about you, Eric?
Tell us about yourself.
What about your family?
Well, my mom was born on Guam.
Her side of the family is from there,
but she grew up in Washington State.
That’s where she met my father.
But something interesting happened
to my mom before she was married.
What was that?
Well, after she graduated high school
she took a trip to Guam,
and she was impressed
by the need that was there,
so much so that she had this strong desire
to go back to Guam someday
in order to preach there.
We call that the missionary spirit.
And she wanted to go back.
So tell us what happened.
Well, my parents were married,
and they served at Brooklyn Bethel.
But in 1979, they attended Gilead School.
Oh, interesting.
They had graduated from the 67th class of
Gilead, and then my mom’s dream came true.
They got their assignment?
Their assignment was Guam.
Oh, beautiful.
Excellent.
And they absolutely loved that assignment.
And then some years later,
my siblings and I came along.
Mm-hmm.
So then what happened?
Well, after some years,
we moved back to Washington State.
But even though we left Guam,
something never changed for my parents.
What was that?
Their love for the people of Guam
never changed.
So although they were geographically located
outside of Guam in the United States,
here in Washington, their heart
was still in Guam.
And did that influence you as a young man?
It sure did.
They still had that missionary spirit,
and they wanted to encourage us
to reach out and do more.
So one time, as an entire family,
we visited Guam.
During that trip, I fell in love with Guam.
You did?
I loved it so much
that when I turned 19,
I decided to move to Guam by myself.
And then at a convenient time,
the rest of my family ended up
moving out to Guam as well.
And in fact, both my parents
are still serving there now.
Isn’t that wonderful?
So your mother and father
and their love for the people in Guam
evidently influenced you, because you fell
in love with the people in Guam too . . .
I sure did.
. . . especially with someone very special.
Excellent.
So, what do we see here, Eric?
This is a picture of my family
just outside the Kingdom Hall
that we attended when we were young.
It’s my parents, my older sister,
my two younger brothers, and that is me
standing in the back.
And we have another picture too.
This is again, all of us,
but when we’re a little more grown up.
We were together on Guam at a convention.
And now your parents
are still in Guam serving there.
Now, what a good example
they must have set, though,
for you and the family and the siblings,
and how encouraged they must have been
that you too had that missionary spirit!
Beautiful.
Tell us how many publishers there are
in Micronesia at this time.
Well, we have about 1,200 publishers.
That’s throughout all
the islands in Micronesia.
And I know that number
may not sound like much,
but actually it is
a really impressive number.
And what makes it impressive?
Well, I think it’s the fact that new ones
face a definite challenge
before they come in the truth.
The communities in Micronesia
are very small.
They’re very close-knit,
and people really depend on one another
for everyday life.
So when someone becomes a Witness,
they can be viewed by their community
as an outsider
and they lose that connection
to that support system
that they’ve had for so long.
So it’s a real test of faith for them
to trust that Jehovah
can and will take care of them.
Yeah, it must not be easy.
It sure isn’t easy for many of them.
But despite those challenges,
many honesthearted ones
courageously take a stand
to join Jehovah’s people.
Beautiful.
And when they do that,
they receive a wonderful blessing.
They end up becoming
like a family to one another.
So when there is that time of need,
they are right there to help them.
Beautiful.
It’s something that’s very touching to see.
So the love of Micronesia
is obvious and evident.
And can you relate another example
of the Christian love there in Micronesia?
One that very quickly comes to mind
for both of us is the island of Kosrae.
Kosrae.
Now, we don’t hear often about Kosrae.
Can you tell us about it?
It’s a very small island
that has just one congregation
of about eight publishers,
yet they’re so faithful and loyal to Jehovah.
Interesting.
Eight publishers.
But Jehovah is interested
in this small group,
just like in Noah’s day,
they were just eight.
Kosrae has about eight.
So how is Jehovah’s interest shown in them?
Well, it’s very clear
from the translation work that’s being done.
Jehovah’s organization provides publications
that are translated
into their local language.
It’s just so incredible to see.
Because what other organization
would do that besides Jehovah’s?
Beautiful.
But it is proof that he’s reassuring them
that he sees them and that he loves them.
Oh, they must be thrilled with that.
Thank you for sharing
that very important point.
So, what do we have?
We have a paradisaic assignment,
but it does come with some challenges.
As you say, the courage
to stand up for one’s beliefs
and the island just having a few publishers
—these are challenges.
Am I missing anything?
Well, something else that comes to mind
is that some of these islands are so remote,
and because of that,
they don’t always have very good Internet.
And that means it can be a challenge to get
the spiritual food
to our brothers and sisters at times.
So how would they meet that challenge?
Well, a huge help has been the JW Box.
We see a picture of it here.
The JW Box is a small device.
It can actually fit in your hand.
And the JW Box can connect to the Internet
and download almost anything
that’s available on jw.org.
Isn’t that beautiful?
And then, once it downloads
publications and videos,
the brothers and sisters can connect
their personal devices to the JW Box.
Then they have access
to all of this spiritual food
without them ever needing to connect
to the Internet themselves.
Now, that is a wonderful provision,
and we thank
“the faithful and discreet slave”
for making sure the brothers in Kosrae
are spiritually nourished.
Beautiful.
The Gilead legacy continues
on there in Micronesia.
It was started back there in 1954
when the first Gilead-trained missionaries
came to Micronesia.
And we see a picture of them.
That is Sam Wiger and his wife, Virginia.
And at that time, there were only
about 12 publishers in Guam.
But ‘never despise
the day of small beginnings,’
because with their arrival,
the Gilead legacy was set in motion.
And now the Micronesia branch territory
spreads over a large area with many islands.
Yes, and some of these islands
you can’t reach by plane.
You can only take a boat to get there.
So the branch office
has organized preaching campaigns
where boats of Witnesses go to these
different islands and preach there.
And that’s actually what we see
in this picture here.
So by boat, the brothers reach this island.
And what are we seeing?
Is this a congregation meeting?
After a few days of preaching on the island,
this was their last day,
and they invited all the interested ones
to come together to this group meeting.
And what they did
was they had a group Bible study.
But they focused on teaching
these interested ones
how to study the
Bible Teach  book on their own.
Good.
That way, when the brothers and sisters left,
they could still feed themselves spiritually.
Oh, that is so encouraging.
Thank you so much for sharing.
So it’s a beautiful island, true.
But it’s the precious people
on the island that are really benefiting
from Jehovah’s provisions.
So, what should we do?
Should we take a trip
to the Micronesian islands
and visit the brothers
and see how they’re doing?
Would you like to do that?
We’d love that.
Good.
Then let’s pay attention to the video.
Located in the western Pacific Ocean,
Micronesia is one
of three major island regions,
along with Polynesia and Melanesia.
The word Micronesia means “small islands”
and includes some 2,000 scattered islands.
Yet, the islands are so tiny
that their combined landmass
is only about 1,055 square miles,
or 2,730 square kilometers,
not much larger than
that of Rhode Island,
the smallest state in the United States.
The branch is located on the island of Guam
but is referred to as the Micronesia branch.
Most people think
of Paradise when they come to Micronesia,
but it’s the spiritual paradise
that is truly breathtaking.
That’s right.
The brothers and sisters are hardworking
and loyal for Jehovah’s name.
For example, on the island of Kosrae,
they may be a small group,
but they are sending up
a great shout of praise to Jehovah.
What I love about our assignment in Kosrae
is that the people
really have a love for the Bible.
It’s very easy
to have Bible studies
or long conversations with people.
So it makes it very easy to talk
to them about spiritual things.
It makes the ministry very enjoyable.
In case you saw a family resemblance,
that wasn’t just our sister in the truth.
That was Megan’s real sister.
We’re so proud of them and all those exerting
themselves vigorously to reach
honesthearted people in remote areas.
And don’t forget time zones.
Oh, right.
The circuit we’re currently in
is made up of four different time zones,
eight different islands,
and from east to west,
it’s a distance
of about 2,500 miles (4,000 km).
And in our circuit, there are
actually seven different languages.
It’s a lot of work.
Each week we pack our bags
and then move on to the next island.
The friends are never alone,
no matter how far out they might be
or how few publishers might be there.
We see generosity.
We see contentment.
We see zeal.
Jehovah is taking care of them.
On these islands, the precious resources
are definitely Jehovah’s people.
Absolutely!
Micronesia may be remote,
but once you’re here, you’re home.
Eric, that was beautiful.
“Once you’re here, you’re home.”
Thank you for making it your home too.
And to meet your sister like that—
I know you’re proud of her.
You said you were.
And we’re proud of her too and proud of you.
And that circuit overseer couple—they’re
doing a great work, aren’t they, there?
They sure are.
That self-sacrificing spirit—we could say
that the Gilead, or the missionary,
legacy continues there in Micronesia.
Thank you so much.
Well, it’s very clear
that Jehovah is blessing
the brothers in Micronesia
—the work is thriving.
And, Megan and Eric,
it’s just a pleasure to have you with us
not just in class
but as part of The Inside Story.
And we wish you the best
in the days ahead.
Thank you.
So, what do you think?
Can a school have “special mightiness”?
It can if Jehovah backs it.
And that’s exactly what he has done
for Gilead School.
Repeatedly, it has been made clear
that Jehovah is blessing
the Governing Body’s efforts
to promote and to support divine education
throughout the earth.
Why all this education?
In the words of Brother Knorr:
“We want to move
to higher levels of understanding
“so that we get deeper
into the thoughts of Jehovah
as he . . . expressed them in his Word.”
Therefore, nothing can stop divine education,
and nothing will ever slow it down.
The world says 80 years
is probably the time to slow down.
But to Jehovah’s people,
80 is just getting started.
Until the next time on The Inside Story.
Thank you so much, Brother Noumair,
and those who participated with you.
That was just outstanding!
Can you imagine 80 years
of the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead?
You know, we just remembered
the other day that the brothers,
when they initiated Gilead, thought they
would only have enough resources
to be able to have the school for five years.
It’s amazing to think what
Jehovah has accomplished!